+++
date = "2016-12-22T21:45:10+08:00"
draft = true
title = "Android Fuzzing"
tags = [ "Android", "Fuzzing", "blog" ]
+++


Fuzz tesing is a method for testing software input validation by feeding it intentionally malformed input. Due to its simpleness and automated nature, fuzz attracted many researches to develop a fuzzer. Meanwhile,fuzz testing is not without drawbacks, the performance is the biggest problem. In order to fuzz a target application, the follow 4 steps should be accomplished:

	1. Identifing the target
	2. Generating input
	3. Test-case delivery
	4. Crash monitoring

___
#### Identifying Target ####

Identifying a target is the first step to craft an effective fuzzer. Beacause Android's attack surface is very large, there are many potential targets that fuzzing can be used to test. The target in android can be an API function, an area of code and even a android component(Reciever).

___
#### Generating input ####
Generating input is the part of the fuzzing process that has the most variations. Even for a 16-bit input, exploring the entire input set is infeasible. Researches try to find the most effective inputs in such a vast input space. The most popular type of fuzzing is called dump-fuzzing. In this type, a new test input is generated by mutating existing, valid inputs. This offers quick development time because it does not require a deep understanding of the input data. The other popular type is smart-fuzzing. As its name implies, smart-fuzzing apply intelligence to input generation. The mount of intelligence applied varies case to case, but understanding the input's data format is paramount. Meanwhile, combining these two types of fuzzing has the potential to generate inputs that would not be generated with either of the approach alone.

___
#### Test-case delivery ####
After crafting malformed input, the next task is to process your inputs with the target software. Actually, delivery methods vary depending on the target selected. Fuzzing a socket-based sevice require sending packets, potentially requiring session setup and teardown. Fuzzing Reciever require send a broadcast message.

____
#### Monitoring Results ####
The fourth task in conducting effective fuzz testing is monitoring test results. In android, logcat can be used as the source for indicators of a crash which will shows the crash or exception information.
